# Proofs
- Proofs are an informal essay that will persuade a logical reader that a mathematical statement is true.

## Vocab
### Mathematical Proof
- A valid argument that demonstrates that a mathematical statement is true.
- A proof usually starts by restating the premises and ends with the conclusion.

### Theorem
- A true mathematical statement is called a **theorem**.
- In practice, the term usually refers to important true mathematical statements.

### Propositions
- Less important true mathematical statements.

### Lemma
- A theorem that is needed as a stepping stone to prove a greater theorem.

### Corollary
- A theorem that is an immediate consequence of another theorem

### Axiom
- A statement that is assumed to be true without proof.
- Basically self-evident truths.

## Formal vs Informal Proofs
- Formal proofs are written in a formal language that has a well-defined set of rules for writing mathematical statements.
- Informal proofs are written in a natural language such as English.

## Things that are considered Axioms
- The laws of arithmetic for real numbers, in particular the commutative, associative and distributive laws.
- The order properties among real numbers
- The closure properties of integers: sums and products of integers are again integers
- The sign properties of real numbers: products of two positive numbers are posive, as are products of negative numbers.
- Adding a number to an equation, or multiplying an equation by a nonzero number, transforms the equation into an equivalent equation
- Adding a number to an inequality, or multiplying an inequality by a positive number, transforms the inequality into an equivalent inequality
- Multiplying an inequality by a negative number and flipping the inequality symbol transforms the inequality into an equivalent inequality

## Direct vs Indirect Proofs
- There are multiple ways to prove a theorem.
  - Directly: we assume the premise $p$ and then use definitoins, axioms, theorems, and other previously proven results to arrive at the conclusion $q$.
  - By contraposition: we give a direct proof of teh contrapositive $\neg q \rightarrow \neg p$.
    - This works because the contraposition is logically equivalent to the original statement.
  - By contradiction: we assume the premise $p$ and the negation of the desired conclusion, $\neg q$. We construct a logical argument that leads to a contradiction.
  - Both by contraposition and by contradiction are indirect proofs.

## Definitions to be used in proofs
### Even and Odd
- An integer $n$ is even if there exists an integer $k$ such that $n = 2k$.
- An integer $n$ is odd if there exists an integer $k$ such that $n = 2k + 1$.

### Rational and Irrational
- A real number $x$ is rational if there exists integers $p$ and $q$ such that $x = \frac{p}{q}$ and $q \neq 0$.
  - Note that $q$ cannot be 0 because division by 0 is undefined.
- A real number $x$ is irrational if it is not rational.