# Functions
## Definitions and Vocabulary
- A function is a rule that assigns to each element in a set $A$ exactly one element in a set $B$.
- **Domain**: the set of inputs
- **Codomain**: the set of possible outputs
- **Range**: the set of actual outputs
  - range $f = \{y \in B | \exists x \in A (f(x) = y)\}$
  - We also say that $f$ maps $A$ to $B$, and refer $f$ as a map.
- Two functions are equal *if and only if* their domains are equal, their codomains are equal, and $f(x) = g(x)$ for all $x$ in the common domain.

## Range vs Codomain
```java
long sqr(int n){
    return n * n;
}
```
- In this sample code, the codomain would be the set of all longs.
- The range would be the set of all longs that are perfect squares.

## Representing Functions
- Functions that have a finite domain can be represented by a table of values or an arrow diagram.
- There doesn't need to be a formula to represent a function.

## Representing Functions Algebraically
- It is customary to define a function by writing
  - $f(x) = x^2$
- A precise mathematical definition of a function is
  - $f: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}; f(x) = x^2$ for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$

## Well-Definedness
- If you formally specify a codomain that does not contain all the outputs, then your function is inconsistent. It is not well-defined.
- To avoid this problem, people often just make an "obvious" choice for the codomain, such as $\mathbb{R}$.

## Floor and Ceiling Functions
- The **floor** of a real number $x$, denoted by $\lfloor x \rfloor$, is the largest integer that is less than or equal to $x$.
  - Round down
- The **ceiling** of a real number $x$, denoted by $\lceil x \rceil$, is the smallest integer that is greater than or equal to $x$.
  - Round up

## The Image Function on Sets
- The **image** of a set $A$ under a function $f$ is the set of all outputs of $f$ for elements of $A$.
  - $f(A) = \{f(x) | x \in A\}$

## The Preimage Function
- The **preimage** of a set $B$ under a function $f$ is the set of all inputs of $f$ that map to elements of $B$.
  - $f^{-1}(B) = \{x \in A | f(x) \in B\}$

## Injective or One-to-One Functions
- Some functions map two or more different input to the same output.
- These functions could be called *information degrading* because the knowledge of the output does not tell you the input.
- To prove that a function is injective, you must prove that: $\forall x_1,x_2 (f(x_1)=f(x_2) \rightarrow x_1=x_2)$
- To prove that a function is not injective, you must find two inputs that map to the same output.

### Making a function injective by restricting its domain
- We can always force a non-injective function to become injective by restricting its domain to a suitable subset to avoid repetition of outputs.
  - The function $f(x) = x^2$ is not injective on $\mathbb{R}$, but it is injective on $\mathbb{R}^+$.

## Surjective or Onto Functions
- The definitoin of a function does not require the codomain to be equal to the range. This is practical because the range of a function is not always obvious.
- Given that $f(x)=x^4-x^2+x$
  - The function goes to infinity on the right and left and therefore has an absolute minimum c.
  - Finding the value of C is not easy but since the range equals the codomain, we can call the function **surjective** or **onto**.
    - formal: $f: A \rightarrow B$ is surjective or onto if and only if $\forall y \in B \exists x \in A(f(x)=y)$

## Bijective
- A function that is both injective and surjective is called **bijective**.
- A bijective function is also called a **one-to-one correspondence**.
- Each bijective function has an inverse function(**invertible**).
  - $f^{-1}(y) = x$ if and only if $f(x) = y$


## Inverse Functions
- The inverse of a function $f$ is the function that maps each output of $f$ back to its input.
- The inverse of $f$ is denoted by $f^{-1}$.
- $f^{-1}(y) = x$ if and only if $f(x) = y$
- $f^{-1}(f(x)) = x$ for all $x$ in the domain of $f$
- $f(f^{-1}(y)) = y$ for all $y$ in the domain of $f^{-1}$

## Increasing and Decreasing Functions
- Let $f: A \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ be a real function. Then $f$ is called
  - Increasing iff $\forall x, y \in A(x \lt y \rightarrow f(x) \leq f(y))$
  - Strictly increasing iff $\forall x, y \in A(x \lt y \rightarrow f(x) \lt f(y))$
  - Decreasing iff $\forall x, y \in A(x \lt y \rightarrow f(x) \geq f(y))$
  - Strictly decreasing iff $\forall x, y \in A(x \lt y \rightarrow f(x) \gt f(y))$
  - You can use calculus to prove that a function is increasing or decreasing.
    - If $f'(x) \geq 0$ for all $x$ in the domain of $f$, then $f$ is increasing.
    - If $f'(x) \leq 0$ for all $x$ in the domain of $f$, then $f$ is decreasing.
    - If $f'(x) \gt 0$ for all $x$ in the domain of $f$, then $f$ is strictly increasing.

## Composition
- The **composition** of two functions $f$ and $g$ is the function that maps each element $x$ in the domain of $f$ to $g(f(x))$.
- if $g: A \rightarrow B$ and $f: B \rightarrow C$ are both bijective, then so is $f \circ g$.