# Sets
## Defintions and Vocabulary of Sets
- A set is a collection of objects.
- The objects in a set are called **elements** or **members** of the set.
- Sets are usually denoted by uppercase letters, and their members by lowercase letters.
- To say that $a$ is a member of the set $A$, we write $a \in A$.
  - The negation is $a \notin A$.
- To define a finite set ( a set with finitely many elements), you can list the members between the braces:
  - $A = \{a, b, d\}$
  - The memebers do not have to numbers.
- A set is an unordered data structure
- You cannot have duplicate elements in a set.

## Other Ways of Defining Sets
## Set Builder Notation
- To avoid ambiguity, we can define a set using set builder notation.
- $S = \{x |$ the condition on x that defines the membership$\}$
- For example the set A above could have been defined with the set builder notation as 
  - $A = \{x |$ x is an integer and 1 $\leq x \leq 3\}$

## Do not Abuse Set Notations and Language
- If you kow that Pierre is French, you say "Pierre is Frnech". Unless there is a specific need, you do not say "Pierre is a member of the set of all people who are French".
  - the set $\{x | x \in [1,2]\}$ is more clearly written as $[1,2]$

## Names for Common Sets
- $\mathbb{N}$: the set of natural numbers
  - $\mathbb{N} = \{1,2,3,4,5,...\}$
- $\mathbb{Z}$: the set of integers
  - $\mathbb{Z} = \{...,-3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3,...\}$
- $\mathbb{Q}$: the set of rational numbers
- $\mathbb{R}$: the set of real numbers
- $\mathbb{C}$: the set of complex numbers

## The Empty Set and Singelton Sets
- The empty set is the set with no elements.
  - $\emptyset = \{\}$.
- A set that has 1 member is called a singleton set.
  - $A = \{1\}$
  - $B = \{\{1,2\}\}$
  - $C = \{\emptyset\}$

## Interval Notation
- $[a,b] = \{x | a \leq x \leq b\}$
- $(a,b) = \{x | a < x < b\}$
- $[a,b) = \{x | a \leq x < b\}$
- $(a,b] = \{x | a < x \leq b\}$

## The Subset Relationship
- If every element of set A is also in B, we say that $A$ is a subset of $B$.
  - We write $A \subseteq B$.
  - Formal definition: $A \subseteq B \leftrightarrow \forall x (x \in A \rightarrow x \in B)$
- If $A \subseteq B$ and $A \neq B$, we say that $A$ is a **proper subset** of $B$.
  - We write $A \subset B$.

## Set Equality
- Two sets are equal if and only if they have the same elements.
  - $A = B \leftrightarrow \forall x (x \in A \leftrightarrow x \in B)$
  - To prove that two sets $A$ and $B$ are equal, you must prove that $\forall x (x \in A \leftrightarrow x \in B)$.

## Cardinality of a Set
- The cardinality of a set is the number of elements in a finite set.
- We denote the cardinality of a set $A$ by $|A|$ or $c(S)$.

## Power Sets
- The power set of a set $A$ is the set of all subsets of $A$.
  - $P(A) = \{S | S \subseteq A\}$
  - $P(\{1,2,3\}) = \{\emptyset, \{1\}, \{2\}, \{3\}, \{1,2\}, \{1,3\}, \{2,3\}, \{1,2,3\}\}$
  - We will later prove that $|P(A)| = 2^{|A|}$

## The Cartesian Product
- An **ordered pair** is a pair of objects in which one is designated as the first element and the other as the second element.
  - $(a,b)$ is an ordered pair with $a$ as the first element and $b$ as the second element.
- The Cartesian product of two sets $A$ and $B$ is the set of all ordered pairs $(a,b)$ where $a \in A$ and $b \in B$.
  - $A \times B = \{(a,b) | a \in A \land b \in B\}$
  - $A \times B = \{(1,2), (1,3), (2,2), (2,3), (3,2), (3,3)\}$
- The Cartesian Product is not commutative
  - $A \times B \neq B \times A$