# Predicates, Quantifiers, and Nested Quantifiers
## Predicates
- Proposition-valued functions are also known as **predicates**, because just like predicates in grammar, they convey an idea about, or express the action of, a subject.
- The domain (set of input values) of a predicate is called the **domain of discourse** or **universe of discourse**.
- We assume that the domain of a predicate is not empty.
- A predicate can be a function of several variables.
  - For example, $P(x, y)$ is a predicate with two variables or a *binary predicate*.

## Defining a predicate without referring to an input
- Some predicates can be defined without referring to an input.
- $D(x)$ = "x is a dog" can be defined by $D$ = "is a dog".

## Quantification
- An evaluation turns a predicate into a proposition.
  - Another way to do that is by **quantification**.
- A quantification of a predicate is the proposition that $P(x)$ is true for some or all inputs.
- The two basic quantifiers are:
  - The **universal quantifier** $\forall$ (for all)
    - $\forall x P(x)$ is true if $P(x)$ is true for every $x$ in the domain of discourse.
  - The **existential quantifier** $\exists$ (there exists)
    - $\exists x P(x)$ is true if $P(x)$ is true for at least one $x$ in the domain of discourse.

## Nested Quantified Statements
- Nested quantified statements have to be parsed from left to right
- $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$ is the statement $\forall x (\exists y P(x, y))$
- You cannot reliably parse nested quantified statements via word substitution.
## The perils of word substitution
- Can be done but is tricky
- Correct: Given $\forall x\exists y P(x, y)$ as for all x, there exists y such that P(x, y).
- Incorrect: Given $\exists x \forall y P(x, y)$ as there exists x such that for all y, P(x, y).
  - The meaning expressed in english is $\forall x\exists y P(x, y)$ which is not the same as $\exists x \forall y P(x, y)$

## Translating Quantified Statements
- Given $P$ as $P(x, y)$ = "$x$ loves $y$", where $x$ and $y$ represent people, $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$
  - Literal Reading: "For all $x$, there exists $y$ such that $x$ loves $y$"
  - Meaningful Translation: "Everyone loves someone"
- Given $P$ as $P(x, y)$ = "$x$ loves $y$", where $x$ and $y$ represent people, $\exists y \forall x P(x, y)$
  - Literal Reading: "There exists $y$ such that for all $x$, $x$ loves $y$"
  - Meaningful Translation: "Someone is loved by everyone"
- This shows that the order of quantifiers matters
  - $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$ is not the same as $\exists y \forall x P(x, y)$
  - "Everyone loves someone" $\neq$ "Someone is loved by everyone"
    - For clarification, the first statement says that everyone loves a person.
    - The second statement says that there is a person that is loved by everyone.

# The Unique Exstential Quantifier
- The **unique existential quantifier** $\exists_1$ is used to denote that there is exactly one element in the domain of discourse that satisfies the predicate.

# Universal Quantification with a Domain Restriction
- The proposition "Every Positive real number has a real square root" can be expressed as: $\forall x > 0 \exists y (y^2 = x)$
- This can also be written as $\forall x \exists y (x>0 \rightarrow y^2 = x)$
- A domain-restructed universal quantification of a predicate is logically equivalent to the unrestricted universal quantification of a **conditional** in which the domain restriction is the premise, and the predicate is the conclusion.
  - "All Swedish people are tall" $\equiv$ "It is true for all people that if they are Swedish, then they are tall".

# Existential Quantification with a Domain Restriction
- Given the proposition: There is a positive real number whose square is 2 can be expressed as $\exists x > 0 (x^2 = 2)$
- This can also be written as $\exists x (x > 0 \wedge x^2 = 2)$
- A domain-restricted existential quantification of a predicate is logically equivalent to the unrestricted existential quantification of the **conjunction** of the domain restriction and the predicate.
  - "There is a Chinese dog that is blue" $\equiv$ "There is a dog that is Chinese and blue"

# Domain Restricted Quantification in the Notation of Sets
- We can give a general formula for the two different ways of expressing domain-restricted quantifications.
- Assume that $S$ is a subdomain of a given domain of discourse $D$ and $P$ is a predicate defined on $D$.
  - $\forall x \in S (P(x))$ is equivalent to $\forall x (x \in S \rightarrow P(x))$
  - $\exists x \in S (P(x))$ is equivalent to $\exists x (x \in S \wedge P(x))$

# Bound vs Free Variables
- A **bound variable** is a variable that is subject to a quantifier.
- A **free variable** is a variable that is not subject to a quantifier.
- Given that $\forall x P(x, y)$, $x$ is a ``bound variable`` and $y$ is a ``free variable``.
  - Since there is a ``free variable``, $\forall x P(x, y)$ is not a proposition.
  - Propositions must only contain ``bound variables``.

# Precedence of Quantifiers and Scope
- Quantifiers are a higher precedence than all logical operators.
  - To say that "for all x, both $P(x)$ and $Q(x)$ are true" is $\forall x (P(x) \wedge Q(x))$
- The part of an expression that a quantifer acts on is called the **scope** of the quantifier.

# Logical Equivalences of Statements Predicates
- When something is logically equivalent, they are logically equivalent reguardless of the predicates and their domain.
  - To show logical non-equivalence, it is sufficient to come up with 1 specific predicate for which the two statements do not share the same truth value.

# Quantification and Negation
- If it is false that "all dogs are large", then does it follow logically that "all dogs are small?"
  - No. The negation of "all dogs are large" is "there exists a dog that is not large".
## De Morgan's Laws for Quantifiers
- $\neg \exists x \forall y \exists z \forall w (x + y < z + w) \equiv \forall x \exists y \forall z \exists w (x + y \geq z + w)$

# Quantification and Conjunction
- We are given that "Every person has a cat and every person has a dog". Then it is logical to conclude that "every person has a cat and a dog", and the converse of that reasoning would be valid.
  - $\forall x (P(x) \wedge Q(x)) \equiv \forall x P(x) \wedge \forall x Q(x)$
  - Does this work for $\exists$?
    - No. "There exists a person that has a cat and a dog" does not imply that "there exists a person that has a cat and there exists a person that has a dog".
    - $\exists x (P(x) \wedge Q(x)) \not\equiv \exists x P(x) \wedge \exists x Q(x)$

# Quantification and Disjunction
- "Thee is someone who has a cat, or there is someone who has a dog." Locially, "there is someonw who has a cat or a dog."
- Conversely, "if there is someone who has a cat or a dog, then we know that there is someone who has a cat, or there is someone who has a dog."
  - $\exists x (P(x) \vee Q(x)) \equiv \exists x P(x) \vee \exists x Q(x)$
  - Does this work for $\forall$?
    - No. "Every person has a cat or a dog" does not imply that "every person has a cat or every person has a dog".
    - $\forall x (P(x) \vee Q(x)) \not\equiv \forall x P(x) \vee \forall x Q(x)$

# Summary of Logical Equivalences and Non-Equivalences
- $\neg \forall x P(x) \equiv \exists x \neg P(x)$
- $\neg \exists x P(x) \equiv \forall x \neg P(x)$
- $\forall x (P(x) \wedge Q(x)) \equiv \forall x P(x) \wedge \forall x Q(x)$
- $\exists x (P(x) \wedge Q(x)) \not\equiv \exists x P(x) \wedge \exists x Q(x)$
- $\exists x (P(x) \vee Q(x)) \equiv \exists x P(x) \vee \exists x Q(x)$
- $\forall x (P(x) \vee Q(x)) \not\equiv \forall x P(x) \vee \forall x Q(x)$